README.md, before:

# Common Operating Picture (COP) Extension Specification

- **Title:** Common Operating Picture (COP)
- **Identifier:** <https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json>
- **Field Name Prefix:** cop
- **Scope:** Item, Collection
- **Extension [Maturity Classification](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/tree/master/extensions/README.md#extension-maturity):** Proposal
- **Owner**: @luciocola <https://secure-dimensions.de>

This extension provides fields for documenting Common Operating Picture (COP) information in STAC catalogs. It facilitates the exchange of operational data using Discrete Global Grid Systems (DGGS) for spatial organization, supporting emergency response, defense operations, and real-time situational awareness.

## Background

A Common Operating Picture (COP) is a standardized format for transferring operational data between systems, platforms, and applications. Based on the OGC OWS Context Conceptual Model (12-080r2), this extension enables:

- **Standardized Data Exchange**: Consistent format for operational information
- **DGGS-based Spatial Organization**: Uses rHEALPix or other DGGS for spatial indexing
- **Real-time Situational Awareness**: Support for time-sensitive operational data
- **Multi-domain Operations**: Emergency response, defense, disaster management
- **Interoperability**: Seamless exchange across different systems

## Use Cases

1. **Emergency Response Operations**: Track resources, incidents, and response activities during flooding, wildfires, or natural disasters with vector features and raster elevation/hazard models
2. **Defense and Security**: Coordinate military operations with spatial and temporal precision using both vector intelligence data and raster imagery/terrain analysis
3. **Disaster Management**: Organize relief efforts using DGGS-based spatial cells, combining vector asset locations with raster damage assessments
4. **Real-time Sensor Networks**: Integrate sensor data into operational picture, including vector point observations and raster interpolated surfaces
5. **Multi-agency Coordination**: Share information across organizational boundaries with appropriate access controls, supporting both vector features and raster datasets
6. **Terrain Analysis**: Distribute elevation models, slope analysis, and other raster-based terrain products for operational planning

## Fields

The fields in the table below can be used in these parts of STAC documents:

- [ ] Catalogs
- [x] Collections
- [x] Item Properties (incl. Summaries in Collections)
- [x] Assets (for both Collections and Items, incl. Item Asset Definitions in Collections)
- [ ] Links

### Item and Collection Properties

| Field Name              | Type   | Description |
| ----------------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| cop:mission             | string | **RECOMMENDED.** Mission or operation identifier |
| cop:classification      | string | **RECOMMENDED.** Security classification level. One of: `public release`, `internal`, `confidential`, `restricted`, `classified` |
| cop:releasability       | string | Releasability specification (e.g., `1:N` for one-to-many, specific entity/group identifiers) |
| cop:dggs_zone_id        | string | DGGS zone identifier for the operational area (e.g., rHEALPix cell ID like `R312603625535`) |
| cop:dggs_crs            | string | DGGS Coordinate Reference System (e.g., `rHEALPix-R12`) |
| cop:service_provider    | string | Provider of the service or data |
| cop:manifest_ref        | string (URI) | Reference to the master COP manifest |
| cop:volume_of_interest  | Volume Object | 3D volume of interest definition using DGGS zones |
| cop:platform            | string | Platform that captured or generated the data (e.g., satellite name, aircraft, UAV, sensor system) |
| cop:sensor              | string | Sensor or instrument that captured the data |
| cop:software_identifier | string | Software used to create or process the data (e.g., 'QGIS/3.28', 'ArcGIS/10.8') |

### Asset-Level Fields

| Field Name              | Type   | Description |
| ----------------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| cop:asset_type          | string | Type of COP asset. One of: `feature`, `feature-query-result`, `point-of-interest`, `web-service`, `sensor-data`, `imagery`, `other` |
| cop:integrity_hash      | string | Integrity hash for asset verification (format: `algorithm:hash`, e.g., `sha256:abc123...`) |

### Additional Field Information

#### cop:classification

Security classification levels for operational data:

- `public release`: Publicly accessible information
- `internal`: Internal use only
- `confidential`: Confidential operational information
- `restricted`: Highly restricted (e.g., attorney-client privilege, sensitive operations)
- `classified`: Classified information requiring security clearance

#### cop:releasability

Specifies who can access the data:
- `1:N`: One-to-many (broadcast to all authorized parties)
- Entity/group identifiers: Specific organizations or individuals
- Coalition identifiers: Multi-national or multi-agency groups

#### cop:dggs_zone_id and cop:dggs_crs

DGGS (Discrete Global Grid System) fields enable precise spatial organization:
- **cop:dggs_zone_id**: Unique cell identifier (e.g., `R312603625535` for rHEALPix)
- **cop:dggs_crs**: CRS specification including resolution (e.g., `rHEALPix-R12`)

Supports various DGGS implementations including rHEALPix, H3, S2, and others.

#### cop:asset_type

Categories of operational assets:

- `feature`: GeoJSON feature or feature collection
- `feature-query-result`: Results from spatial/temporal queries
- `point-of-interest`: Critical locations in operational area
- `web-service`: OGC web services (WMS, WFS, WCS, etc.)
- `sensor-data`: Real-time sensor observations
- `imagery`: Satellite, aerial, or drone imagery
- `raster`: Raster datasets including elevation models, analysis results, and gridded data
- `other`: Other asset types

#### cop:integrity_hash

Self-identifying hash following the [Multihash specification](https://github.com/multiformats/multihash), encoded as hexadecimal string with lowercase letters (e.g., `sha256:a1b2c3...`).

#### cop:platform

Identifies the platform that captured or generated the data. Examples:
- Satellite missions: `Sentinel-2A`, `Landsat-8`, `WorldView-3`
- Aircraft: `Boeing 747-SP`, `Cessna 172`
- UAV/Drones: `DJI Phantom 4`, `Fixed-wing UAV`
- Ground systems: `Desktop QGIS`, `Mobile Sensor Array`
- Other: `Ground Station`, `Weather Buoy`

#### cop:sensor

Specifies the sensor or instrument used to capture the data. Examples:
- Satellite sensors: `MSI`, `OLI`, `TIRS`
- Camera systems: `RGB Camera`, `Multispectral Camera`, `Thermal Imaging`
- Software-generated: `QGIS Raster Layer`, `QGIS Vector Layer`
- Other sensors: `LiDAR`, `SAR`, `Hyperspectral Imager`

#### cop:software_identifier

Identifies the software and version used to create or process the data. Format: `SoftwareName/Version`

Examples:
- `QGIS/3.28.1`
- `ArcGIS/10.8.2`
- `GDAL/3.4.1`
- `Python/3.9.7`

#### Volume of Interest Object

Used in `cop:volume_of_interest` field:

| Field Name  | Type   | Description |
| ----------- | ------ | ----------- |
| min_zone    | string | Minimum DGGS zone ID (bottom/lower bound) |
| max_zone    | string | Maximum DGGS zone ID (top/upper bound) |
| resolution  | string | DGGS resolution level |

## Examples

### Example 1: Point of Interest Feature

```json
{
  "stac_version": "1.0.0",
  "stac_extensions": [
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json"
  ],
  "type": "Feature",
  "id": "poi-00123",
  "geometry": {
    "type": "Polygon",
    "coordinates": [[[-74.0062, 40.7130], [-74.0058, 40.7130], 
                     [-74.0058, 40.7126], [-74.0062, 40.7126], 
                     [-74.0062, 40.7130]]]
  },
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-11-03T09:00:00Z",
    "cop:mission": "Emergency Response Team A",
    "cop:dggs_zone_id": "R312603625535",
    "cop:dggs_crs": "rHEALPix-R12",
    "cop:classification": "public release",
    "cop:releasability": "1:N"
  },
  "assets": {
    "feature_data": {
      "href": "s3://cop-data/features/poi-00123.geojson",
      "type": "application/geo+json",
      "cop:asset_type": "feature",
      "cop:integrity_hash": "sha256:a1b2c3d4e5f6..."
    }
  }
}
```

### Example 2: Raster Data (Elevation Model)

```json
{
  "stac_version": "1.0.0",
  "stac_extensions": [
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json",
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/raster/v1.1.0/schema.json"
  ],
  "type": "Feature",
  "id": "elevation-model-00456",
  "geometry": {
    "type": "Polygon",
    "coordinates": [[[-122.5, 37.9], [-122.3, 37.9], 
                     [-122.3, 37.7], [-122.5, 37.7], 
                     [-122.5, 37.9]]]
  },
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-11-27T12:00:00Z",
    "cop:mission": "Disaster Assessment Operation 2025-11",
    "cop:dggs_zone_id": "R315782134567",
    "cop:dggs_crs": "rHEALPix-R12",
    "cop:classification": "public release",
    "cop:platform": "Desktop QGIS",
    "cop:sensor": "QGIS Raster Layer",
    "cop:software_identifier": "QGIS/3.28.1"
  },
  "assets": {
    "raster_data": {
      "href": "https://assets.ogc.secd.eu/cop/rasters/elevation-model-00456.tif",
      "type": "image/tiff; application=geotiff",
      "cop:asset_type": "raster",
      "cop:integrity_hash": "sha256:1a2b3c4d..."
    }
  }
}
```

See the [examples directory](examples/) for complete examples including service endpoints and collections.

## Relation Types

The following relation types are recommended for use in COP documents:

| Type   | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| about  | Link to the master COP manifest or operational plan |

## Best Practices

1. **DGGS Usage**: Always specify both `cop:dggs_zone_id` and `cop:dggs_crs` when using DGGS-based spatial organization
2. **Security Classification**: Set appropriate `cop:classification` and `cop:releasability` for all operational data
3. **Asset Integrity**: Use `cop:integrity_hash` for critical assets to ensure data integrity
4. **Manifest References**: Link to master COP manifests using `cop:manifest_ref` or `about` relation links
5. **Temporal Precision**: Use RFC 3339 timestamps for all datetime fields
6. **Raster Data**: When using raster assets, combine with the [Raster Extension](https://github.com/stac-extensions/raster) for complete band and data type information
7. **Platform and Sensor**: Use `cop:platform` and `cop:sensor` to track data provenance, especially important for multi-source operational environments
8. **Software Tracking**: Include `cop:software_identifier` to maintain processing lineage and ensure reproducibility

## Contributing

All contributions are subject to the
[STAC Specification Code of Conduct](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
For contributions, please follow the
[STAC specification contributing guide](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Running tests

The same checks that run as checks on PR's are part of the repository and can be run locally to verify that changes are valid. 
To run tests locally, you'll need `npm`, which is a standard part of any [node.js installation](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).

First you'll need to install everything with npm once. Navigate to the root of this repository and run:

```bash
npm install
```

Then to check markdown formatting and test the examples against the JSON schema:

```bash
npm test
```

If the tests reveal formatting problems with the examples, you can fix them with:

```bash
npm run format-examples
```

## License

This extension is licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

Commit message:

Enhance README with AI DGGS pilot information
Updated description to include reference to AI DGGS pilot with OGC.

README.md, after:

# Common Operating Picture (COP) Extension Specification

- **Title:** Common Operating Picture (COP)
- **Identifier:** <https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json>
- **Field Name Prefix:** cop
- **Scope:** Item, Collection
- **Extension [Maturity Classification](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/tree/master/extensions/README.md#extension-maturity):** Proposal
- **Owner**: @luciocola <https://secure-dimensions.de>

This extension provides fields for documenting Common Operating Picture (COP) information in STAC catalogs. This work is based on AI DGGS pilot with OGC Open Geospatial Consortium. It facilitates the exchange of operational data using Discrete Global Grid Systems (DGGS) for spatial organization, supporting emergency response, defense operations, and real-time situational awareness.

## Background

A Common Operating Picture (COP) is a standardized format for transferring operational data between systems, platforms, and applications. Based on the OGC OWS Context Conceptual Model (12-080r2), this extension enables:

- **Standardized Data Exchange**: Consistent format for operational information
- **DGGS-based Spatial Organization**: Uses rHEALPix or other DGGS for spatial indexing
- **Real-time Situational Awareness**: Support for time-sensitive operational data
- **Multi-domain Operations**: Emergency response, defense, disaster management
- **Interoperability**: Seamless exchange across different systems

## Use Cases

1. **Emergency Response Operations**: Track resources, incidents, and response activities during flooding, wildfires, or natural disasters with vector features and raster elevation/hazard models
2. **Defense and Security**: Coordinate military operations with spatial and temporal precision using both vector intelligence data and raster imagery/terrain analysis
3. **Disaster Management**: Organize relief efforts using DGGS-based spatial cells, combining vector asset locations with raster damage assessments
4. **Real-time Sensor Networks**: Integrate sensor data into operational picture, including vector point observations and raster interpolated surfaces
5. **Multi-agency Coordination**: Share information across organizational boundaries with appropriate access controls, supporting both vector features and raster datasets
6. **Terrain Analysis**: Distribute elevation models, slope analysis, and other raster-based terrain products for operational planning

## Fields

The fields in the table below can be used in these parts of STAC documents:

- [ ] Catalogs
- [x] Collections
- [x] Item Properties (incl. Summaries in Collections)
- [x] Assets (for both Collections and Items, incl. Item Asset Definitions in Collections)
- [ ] Links

### Item and Collection Properties

| Field Name              | Type   | Description |
| ----------------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| cop:mission             | string | **RECOMMENDED.** Mission or operation identifier |
| cop:classification      | string | **RECOMMENDED.** Security classification level. One of: `public release`, `internal`, `confidential`, `restricted`, `classified` |
| cop:releasability       | string | Releasability specification (e.g., `1:N` for one-to-many, specific entity/group identifiers) |
| cop:dggs_zone_id        | string | DGGS zone identifier for the operational area (e.g., rHEALPix cell ID like `R312603625535`) |
| cop:dggs_crs            | string | DGGS Coordinate Reference System (e.g., `rHEALPix-R12`) |
| cop:service_provider    | string | Provider of the service or data |
| cop:manifest_ref        | string (URI) | Reference to the master COP manifest |
| cop:volume_of_interest  | Volume Object | 3D volume of interest definition using DGGS zones |
| cop:platform            | string | Platform that captured or generated the data (e.g., satellite name, aircraft, UAV, sensor system) |
| cop:sensor              | string | Sensor or instrument that captured the data |
| cop:software_identifier | string | Software used to create or process the data (e.g., 'QGIS/3.28', 'ArcGIS/10.8') |

### Asset-Level Fields

| Field Name              | Type   | Description |
| ----------------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| cop:asset_type          | string | Type of COP asset. One of: `feature`, `feature-query-result`, `point-of-interest`, `web-service`, `sensor-data`, `imagery`, `other` |
| cop:integrity_hash      | string | Integrity hash for asset verification (format: `algorithm:hash`, e.g., `sha256:abc123...`) |

### Additional Field Information

#### cop:classification

Security classification levels for operational data:

- `public release`: Publicly accessible information
- `internal`: Internal use only
- `confidential`: Confidential operational information
- `restricted`: Highly restricted (e.g., attorney-client privilege, sensitive operations)
- `classified`: Classified information requiring security clearance

#### cop:releasability

Specifies who can access the data:
- `1:N`: One-to-many (broadcast to all authorized parties)
- Entity/group identifiers: Specific organizations or individuals
- Coalition identifiers: Multi-national or multi-agency groups

#### cop:dggs_zone_id and cop:dggs_crs

DGGS (Discrete Global Grid System) fields enable precise spatial organization:
- **cop:dggs_zone_id**: Unique cell identifier (e.g., `R312603625535` for rHEALPix)
- **cop:dggs_crs**: CRS specification including resolution (e.g., `rHEALPix-R12`)

Supports various DGGS implementations including rHEALPix, H3, S2, and others.

#### cop:asset_type

Categories of operational assets:

- `feature`: GeoJSON feature or feature collection
- `feature-query-result`: Results from spatial/temporal queries
- `point-of-interest`: Critical locations in operational area
- `web-service`: OGC web services (WMS, WFS, WCS, etc.)
- `sensor-data`: Real-time sensor observations
- `imagery`: Satellite, aerial, or drone imagery
- `raster`: Raster datasets including elevation models, analysis results, and gridded data
- `other`: Other asset types

#### cop:integrity_hash

Self-identifying hash following the [Multihash specification](https://github.com/multiformats/multihash), encoded as hexadecimal string with lowercase letters (e.g., `sha256:a1b2c3...`).

#### cop:platform

Identifies the platform that captured or generated the data. Examples:
- Satellite missions: `Sentinel-2A`, `Landsat-8`, `WorldView-3`
- Aircraft: `Boeing 747-SP`, `Cessna 172`
- UAV/Drones: `DJI Phantom 4`, `Fixed-wing UAV`
- Ground systems: `Desktop QGIS`, `Mobile Sensor Array`
- Other: `Ground Station`, `Weather Buoy`

#### cop:sensor

Specifies the sensor or instrument used to capture the data. Examples:
- Satellite sensors: `MSI`, `OLI`, `TIRS`
- Camera systems: `RGB Camera`, `Multispectral Camera`, `Thermal Imaging`
- Software-generated: `QGIS Raster Layer`, `QGIS Vector Layer`
- Other sensors: `LiDAR`, `SAR`, `Hyperspectral Imager`

#### cop:software_identifier

Identifies the software and version used to create or process the data. Format: `SoftwareName/Version`

Examples:
- `QGIS/3.28.1`
- `ArcGIS/10.8.2`
- `GDAL/3.4.1`
- `Python/3.9.7`

#### Volume of Interest Object

Used in `cop:volume_of_interest` field:

| Field Name  | Type   | Description |
| ----------- | ------ | ----------- |
| min_zone    | string | Minimum DGGS zone ID (bottom/lower bound) |
| max_zone    | string | Maximum DGGS zone ID (top/upper bound) |
| resolution  | string | DGGS resolution level |

## Examples

### Example 1: Point of Interest Feature

```json
{
  "stac_version": "1.0.0",
  "stac_extensions": [
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json"
  ],
  "type": "Feature",
  "id": "poi-00123",
  "geometry": {
    "type": "Polygon",
    "coordinates": [[[-74.0062, 40.7130], [-74.0058, 40.7130], 
                     [-74.0058, 40.7126], [-74.0062, 40.7126], 
                     [-74.0062, 40.7130]]]
  },
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-11-03T09:00:00Z",
    "cop:mission": "Emergency Response Team A",
    "cop:dggs_zone_id": "R312603625535",
    "cop:dggs_crs": "rHEALPix-R12",
    "cop:classification": "public release",
    "cop:releasability": "1:N"
  },
  "assets": {
    "feature_data": {
      "href": "s3://cop-data/features/poi-00123.geojson",
      "type": "application/geo+json",
      "cop:asset_type": "feature",
      "cop:integrity_hash": "sha256:a1b2c3d4e5f6..."
    }
  }
}
```

### Example 2: Raster Data (Elevation Model)

```json
{
  "stac_version": "1.0.0",
  "stac_extensions": [
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/cop/v1.0.0/schema.json",
    "https://stac-extensions.github.io/raster/v1.1.0/schema.json"
  ],
  "type": "Feature",
  "id": "elevation-model-00456",
  "geometry": {
    "type": "Polygon",
    "coordinates": [[[-122.5, 37.9], [-122.3, 37.9], 
                     [-122.3, 37.7], [-122.5, 37.7], 
                     [-122.5, 37.9]]]
  },
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-11-27T12:00:00Z",
    "cop:mission": "Disaster Assessment Operation 2025-11",
    "cop:dggs_zone_id": "R315782134567",
    "cop:dggs_crs": "rHEALPix-R12",
    "cop:classification": "public release",
    "cop:platform": "Desktop QGIS",
    "cop:sensor": "QGIS Raster Layer",
    "cop:software_identifier": "QGIS/3.28.1"
  },
  "assets": {
    "raster_data": {
      "href": "https://assets.ogc.secd.eu/cop/rasters/elevation-model-00456.tif",
      "type": "image/tiff; application=geotiff",
      "cop:asset_type": "raster",
      "cop:integrity_hash": "sha256:1a2b3c4d..."
    }
  }
}
```

See the [examples directory](examples/) for complete examples including service endpoints and collections.

## Relation Types

The following relation types are recommended for use in COP documents:

| Type   | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| about  | Link to the master COP manifest or operational plan |

## Best Practices

1. **DGGS Usage**: Always specify both `cop:dggs_zone_id` and `cop:dggs_crs` when using DGGS-based spatial organization
2. **Security Classification**: Set appropriate `cop:classification` and `cop:releasability` for all operational data
3. **Asset Integrity**: Use `cop:integrity_hash` for critical assets to ensure data integrity
4. **Manifest References**: Link to master COP manifests using `cop:manifest_ref` or `about` relation links
5. **Temporal Precision**: Use RFC 3339 timestamps for all datetime fields
6. **Raster Data**: When using raster assets, combine with the [Raster Extension](https://github.com/stac-extensions/raster) for complete band and data type information
7. **Platform and Sensor**: Use `cop:platform` and `cop:sensor` to track data provenance, especially important for multi-source operational environments
8. **Software Tracking**: Include `cop:software_identifier` to maintain processing lineage and ensure reproducibility

## Contributing

All contributions are subject to the
[STAC Specification Code of Conduct](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
For contributions, please follow the
[STAC specification contributing guide](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Running tests

The same checks that run as checks on PR's are part of the repository and can be run locally to verify that changes are valid. 
To run tests locally, you'll need `npm`, which is a standard part of any [node.js installation](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).

First you'll need to install everything with npm once. Navigate to the root of this repository and run:

```bash
npm install
```

Then to check markdown formatting and test the examples against the JSON schema:

```bash
npm test
```

If the tests reveal formatting problems with the examples, you can fix them with:

```bash
npm run format-examples
```

## License

This extension is licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
